wiki/1

― I had noticed that many jiu-jitsu players had some kind of special relationship to pit bulls, to fighting dogs.
― They would often have tattoos of a favorite dog, and many gyms and //gis// had a cartoon of a pit bull on them; it was the old symbol for Gracie jiu-jitsu.
― I asked Scotty about it one day, and he put me onto a friend of his, Escorrega.
― 
― A small, slender Gracie Barra black belt with excellent English, Escorrega had been Scotty’s original connection in Brazil.
― He had spent a lot of time in the United States and was working on his “extraordinary person” visa.
― He was also an expert on cockfighting and dogfighting.
― 
― Escorrega’s family was from Minas, a farm town to the south, and for five generations they had been breeding cocks; Escorrega himself had been in dogs for ten years.
― There are two basic types of cocks, just as there are two types of dogs (although there are endless bloodlines and families): One hits harder and tires more quickly; the other has endless stamina but doesn’t strike as hard.
― Escorrega, in dogs and cocks, always preferred the ones that hit harder.
― 
― Escorrega’s real love is not the cocks but dogfighting, and he educated me for hours, his English fluent and filled with “dudes.”
― He got angry with how fighting dogs are demonized: “Fighting dogs are not dangerous to humans, dude.”
― When a dog fights, he explained, there are usually three people in the pit, the two trainers and the referee; and if the dog wants to bite a person, it will leave itself open to the other dog and get killed, or the handler will kill it.
― Fighting dogs who bite people are not bred on.
― Of course, there are always assholes and drug dealers who get good fighting dogs and torture them and teach them bad habits, but that’s not a true fighting dog, and those dogs don’t fight well.
― “Anything in a bad person’s hands can be a weapon,” he said.
― But the trainers, the real ones, are good people, and have regular lives and kids in college and baseball practice and church.
― 
― The international centers for dogfighting are in North America, in the southern United States and in Mexico.
― Escorrega was careful about using real names, but he told me that he lived with one of the greatest dog breeders in the world in the United States.
― The dogs are bred in attempts to find that perfect balance of hard biting and stamina—but the most important trait for a fighting dog, a trait that can breed true, is //gameness//.
― 
― Gameness is a critical term to dogfighters, jiu-jitsu players, and fighters.
― It can be described as heart, as willingness to fight—a love of the fight stronger than a love of life.
― Some dogs don’t last for ten minutes in a fight before they want to quit, and some dogs will die before they quit.
― I mentioned an acquaintance whose family in Louisiana had been in fighting dogs when he was a boy.
― This person said that he was always looking for a dog that would fight past forty-five minutes.
― 
― Escorrega nodded enthusiastically.
― “Not only heart, not just big lungs—what your friend was trying to say.
― People think we force the dogs to fight, but that’s not true.
― The dogs are not created in laboratories—they are bred from dogs who love to fight.
― They train and run and swim in a pool, work on a treadmill, bite rawhide pull toys to develop the neck and bite and shoulders.
― They have a good diet, good carbohydrates, good fats, protein, creatine, vitamins, massage.”
― 
― He smiled knowingly.
― “What your friend was talking about? All this care, you must love the animal, and if the animal loves you back, you will get a dog that fights past forty-five minutes, an animal with gameness.
― If there is love, the dog will fight to the death.
― Like everything, dude.
― Without it, the dog will not show heart.
― That’s why the crazy assholes, the bastards that mistreat their dogs, don’t have good fighting dogs.
― They have no love for their animals and no mercy for what they do.
― If you are fighting for something, you have to fight for what you love.
― If he doesn’t love you, he’s gonna quit.
― No one, no dog in the world, will fight for more than forty-five minutes without love and heart.”
― 
― That’s the secret: It’s about love.
⸺ Sam Sheridan (2007), “A Fighter's Heart” (1st edition), The River Of January.
